It's then time just
started talking about the,
let's say the dessert of the background
execution, the sweetness of this.
That is, how can we wait cap?
Charles could code client side while
the app is in the background, okay?
Or continue the execution of some code,
even if the user is leaving the web app,
closing the PWA,
is closing the browser,
is closing the tab, okay?
And for that,
we're going to go over background sync,
periodic background sync and
background fetch, okay?
Those are the three API's that
are close together different API's but
they were pretty similar.
So, remember that execution
happens in the background,
maybe there is no PWA or
web page currently loaded.
So if we wanna message the user,
we have to use web notifications.
What if the user didn't
grant you permission?
Send the user an email,
a WhatsApp message.
I don't know, an SMS but
you won't have any other option.
Because you're in a Service Worker,
there is no client, no UI,
there is nothing you can do
about notifying the user, okay?
Web notifications is your only chance.
And by the way,
you cannot request permission in
the Service Workers of scope,
because of course you don't have UI.
So you have to request permission
while the user is using the app,
not when you wanna notify for
the first time, okay?
So background sync, officially known as
the web synchronization background API.
The idea is to defer
a synchronization operation until
the device has a stable
connection to the server.
Maybe that until is now, so
maybe I mark a sync operation and
now we have an unstable connection.
So it will be fire now, okay?
Immediately, so that's okay.
So the idea is that a client,
a website, a web app,
a PWA needs to sync data to the server or
from the server.
So I need to send data,
receive data or both.
Instead of doing that, we understand
our fetch handler within my window,
within my my app,
I'm going to just specify to the browser,
we're going to say to the browser
that I need to sync data, okay?
That's how it works.
Then, a sync event will be
fired in the Service Worker.
So, we can handle that pending sync in
the Service Worker that we know that has
a separate life cycle and can continue
executing, [INAUDIBLE] in the background.
If the network is stable right now and
the browser is making that decision,
it will execute that immediately,
right now.
In a separate thread, but now, but
if not, because then we are offline.
We are on a Wi-Fi on a plane and
it's not working properly or
the server is down, wherever,
it will come back later.
When?
We don't know, okay?
Because also,
the battery should be in good level.
It's up to the browser
to make that decision.
So, that means that I'm
trying to sync some data,
the browser thinks that
this is not the right time.
Okay, the user will close the app,
will close the browser,
maybe the user has the phone
in her pocket, his pocket.
And after 20 minutes the browser says,
it seems like the internet is where
it's working fine now let's
try pending sync operation.
It will wake up only
your Service Worker and
it will fire your sync event,
your sync event handler.
And you will make that operation.
So then we access the network at that
point, and we can fulfill the sync.
In that case, it will be removed
from pending sync operations.
Or we can leave it pending.
Like, you know what?
I couldn't do that.
So it's so working,
the server is down, wherever.
So you leave that as
a depending sync operation, and
it will try again later, okay?
That's how it works.
Right now 5% of mobile web apps with
a Service Worker are using the API.
So, for the web apps that
had the habit Service Worker
register 5% of them are using the API,
which is not so
bad compared with a couple of years ago,
okay?
The API is actually pretty simple.
[COUGH] So your only thing you need is
to get the Service Worker registration.
One simple way to do that it
is through the ready promise.
This is like a property, a getter in
JavaScript that returns a promise.
So, I'm going to await for
that and then you go and
sync, you use the sync manager and
you register a tag.
What's a tag name?
A string Identifier for
that sync operation.
What about the data?
So maybe I wanna sync data,
an objects that they wanna send.
It's not up to the API.
So typically, what you're going to do is,
you're going to use index
dv to store the data.
And then the tag name,
it may contain or not the ID or
the name of the data storage or something.
So then server side you know
where to find that information.
The Service Worker can
access IndexedDB databases,
not local storage, the Service Worker
cannot access local storage.
So you must use IndexedDB In
case you need to store
data while it's been synced, okay?
So that's step one,
step two is in the Service Worker.
You listen for the sync event, and
then you check for the event.tag.
If it's the one that you were looking for,
you try to do the sync operation.
That can be a fetch to a server,
and that's all.
Which is good and bad,
because it's very simple API, okay?
So, let's try to do this in our code.
So, in the background js file,
I have already
a button that is trying to
get the sync operation.
That event handler is already async.
So we are ready to use async await here.
So from here,
what I need first is the registration,
the Service Worker registration.
And for that we use
navigator.serviceWorker.ready and
we need to await for it, okay?
When we have the registration,
we have to talk to the sync manager
as we saw here in this one.
And then we register a tag name.
What's the tag name?
A String.
I don't know, I wanna sync like, whatever.
Actually, typically we don't
use the sync prefix or
suffix because we are already in the sync.
And that's all The only
thing that the PWA or
the web app is doing,
is registering a pending operation.
It's saying, hey, I need to sync this.
That's all.
From the Service Worker, what we need
is a new event listener for
the sync event.
And typically what we do
here is we check the tag.
So if it's the tag that we were
looking for like the like,
then we're going to do something, okay?
Make sense?
I have a typo
Let's say this a sync.
Let's make a default here cuz I
will show you how to debug this,
Unknown sync operation for event.tag.
So it's actually pretty simple API.
So remember that in the Service Worker
here we can access fetch, the fetch API.
So we can make her like what
I did here I can do a fetch,
for example, to the log, the same log
that we use in the beacon on my server.
And I can send some properties,
I can send the body, wherever you need.
And you can access IndexedDB or
cache storage API's from here
Make sense?
So if the connection is stable after
you register the sync operation,
it will immediately, maybe a couple of
milliseconds later, in its own thread,
it will execute the sync event
handler with the time that we set.
If the connection is not good enough
at that moment, it will do it later.
By the way how can a website
like the main client know If,
depending on whether the pending operation
finishes or not, if it's still active.
So now, I'm not like doing the fetch from
the main thread, from the main window.
I'm setting the flag as a pending
operation, then the Service Worker in
a different thread goes to the network and
confirms the operation.
How can we know here that it's finally
done if the user didn't close the browser?
So I'm still able to notify the user.
Well, we can communicate workers and
service workers with its clients,
so we can send a message from
the Service Worker to the page saying,
hey, this is done, if you want to
inform the user, does it make sense?
When you see this in action,
if I register a sync,
I don't see anything.
Because the only thing that we
are doing is registering a sync.
And the only way that we have to
see this in action is going for
example here to background sync,
remember I'm inside the application tab.
So in the application tab
in background services.
And then I could start
recording what's going on here.
And this is the background sync activity,
okay?
And it will record all activity for
up to three days even when closed.
So you can come back tomorrow and
see everything that happened
with this origin, okay?
With this website for background sync.
For example,
if it tried to sync the data and
it didn't work for a day and
maybe tried ten times,
you will see timestamps and
every attempt, okay?
Make sense?
You can see that
the Service Worker actually sent
a message to the console
saying that it worked.